---
title: What is Woodstock Letters
period: 1916
abstract: |
     This is the complete material from the Jesuit "Woodstock Letters" author
     Fr. Herbert Parker, of St Stanislaus'.
     [Woodstock Letters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woodstock_Letters)
     is a publication written by Jesuits around the world describing
     institutions, customs and places in which they were situated.
     Talks about St Stanislaus, St Joseph's Convent, Bandra Misc, Bombay ..., Monsoons, Dress, Parsees,
     The Bandra Fair, Khandala, St Stanislaus Again, Funerals and Weddings in Bandra ... Holy Week in Bandra
     as in the year 1916,
---


THE WOODSTOCK LETTERS
=====================

by Robert C. Carriker

There are at the present time, 350 years after their modest beginnings on the
Chesapeake frontier of British North America, approximately five thousand
members of the Society of Jesus in the American Assistancy. A significant factor
in the growth and expansion of the Society in America was the leadership of the
Maryland Province and its influential house of studies, Woodstock College.

The Jesuits, as members of the Society of Jesus are commonly called, are a
Catholic religious order of priests and brothers formed by Ignatius Loyola and
six companions at the University of Paris. The papacy formally recognized the
order in 1540 and by the time of Ignatius' death in 1556 it had grown to twelve
provinces with nearly one thousand members, twenty-three of them in Colonial
America.

As their membership and influence increased, especially in the fields of
missionary placement and education, the Jesuits aroused the opposition of
powerful European monarchs. Kings who were experiencing formation of new
national states feared the dynamic religious Society that by 1770 included about
23,000 members, 42 provinces, 669 colleges, and 274 mission stations world-wide.
As a result, in 1773 Pope Clement XIV was persuaded to suppress the Jesuits. The
ban was not removed until 1814.

Though the Society was not fully restored until 1814, in America the Jesuits
were actually given special papal permission to re-affiliate as early as 1805.
At the moment of their restoration, American Jesuits were almost exclusively
concentrated in the Chesapeake area, inheritors of the Maryland mission begun by
Father Andrew White, S.J. in 1634.

Lord Baltimore was exceedingly kind to the Jesuits during their early years in
Maryland, but after 1645 the political status of the colony changed and so too
did the general acceptance of the Society. Years of persecution followed, yet
the Jesuits not only managed to survive, beginning in 1704 they even expanded
into Pennsylvania. The papal suppression of the Society in 1773 witnessed the
corporate disbanding of the Jesuits in Maryland-Pennsylvania, though their
physical presence remained. Former Jesuit priests organized themselves into a
legal body called the "Corporation of Roman Catholic Clergymen" and thereby
retained legal claim to the property of the Society of Jesus in the Chesapeake
region. Thus, when Pope Pius VI canonically restored the Society, the Maryland
Jesuits were still in place.

But there were other changes that had taken place during the years of the
suppression, changes that forever altered the condition of the Catholic Church
in English North America. To begin, England lost her colonies to the United
States during the Revolutionary War. Also, during that same period, in 1784, the
first American Catholic diocese was established by the Holy See and a former
Jesuit, John Carroll, was appointed bishop.

Bishop Carroll's original Diocese of Baltimore included all of the United States,
with twenty-five priests, and twenty-five thousand Catholics in a national
population of nearly four million. By 1805 the Catholic population in America
almost exactly doubled to fifty thousand members, fifty priests, and two
dioceses. The Jesuits in the United States, meantime, were no less prolific in
their own growth. At the time of the American restoration in 1805 there were
only five remaining Jesuits in all of Maryland, but by the end of the War of
1812 there were an additional fifty members of the Society headquartered at
Georgetown College in the District of Columbia. In succeeding years Jesuits from
this location fanned out to establish churches in Kentucky, schools in New York
City, and a center for Western Indian missions at St. Louis, Missouri. In 1833
the eighty Jesuits in the District of Columbia and Maryland were designated the
first province of the Society of Jesus in America. Hereafter, American Jesuits
would be independent of European jurisdiction.2

Though the Society was growing in size and importance there was still no single
house of studies for the exclusive use of young men studying to become Jesuits.
For a time, novices to the Society were quartered at a facility located at White
Marsh, Maryland, but lack of financial resources placed this operation in peril
almost from its beginning. In 1823, in fact, the novitiate was transferred to
Florissant, Missouri, outside St. Louis. Georgetown College continued to house
most of its scholastics in temporary facilities rather than exile them to the
Missouri frontier, but after 1860 they too were directed away from the Middle
States, this time to Boston.

The recurring problem of how to control the educational needs of the young men
in the Maryland Province begged a permanent solution. During the Civil War years
the establishment of a separate novitiate seemed inadvisable. But in 1866, when
a semblance of stability returned to the Atlantic States, a farm was purchased
near Woodstock, Maryland for the location of a new, large scholasticate. Work
was begun almost immediately and Woodstock College, the first North American
scholasticate for the Society of Jesus, was opened on September 22, 1869.

Among the many obligations assumed by the faculty at Woodstock College was the
continued editing of the Messenger of the Sacred Heart, a popular Catholic
magazine published by Georgetown College.3 Meantime, a small second-hand press
acquired in Boston for \$20 was shipped to Woodstock to assist in the production
of handbills, programs for refectory celebrations, and to spare the labor of
producing multiple copies of class theses by hand. Within a year (1870) printing
began to occupy the natural energy and curiosity of the scholastics.4

Father Joseph E. Keller, S.J., Provincial and Rector of Woodstock, was impressed
by the ambition of his student philosophers and theologians. But he also had
goals of his own. Keller saw the great possibility for good that could be
achieved by the publication of a monthly magazine or quarterly

review of Jesuit activity.5 In the future, he planned, scholastics would produce
an "in-house" record of the activities of American Jesuits. To accomplish that,
however, a larger press would be necessary. Fortunately, the Maryland Province
Jesuits were good at begging and by 1870 they acquired a new press capable of
printing a signature of sixteen pages octavo.6

Early on Father Keller decided that the format of the rather pedantic Messenger,
with its emphasis on devotional literature, learned articles, poetry, literary
criticism, and editorials, would not be duplicated in the new quarterly.
Woodstock College's publication would continue the series of "Letters for Ours
only" that were then offered by several European scholasticates, most notable
England's Letters and Notices, and the Lettres de Laval of France. Keller
conceived the idea of a regular bulletin, or communique, to American Jesuits
carrying a message of hope, but also creating a unified regard for the
achievements of the corporate body.7

The frequency of issues, Keller decided, would be dependent upon "the good will
of those who have it in their power to send materials." Though intended to be a
quarterly, Woodstock Letters would actually be issued three times yearly from
1872 until 1942 and quarterly only after that.8

In the beginning, scholastics continued to assist in the publications that
emerged from Woodstock College in increasing numbers. But when printing began to
interfere with their studies an outside typesetter was hired in July 1871 and
placed under the supervision of a full-time Jesuit editor, Father Emilio M. de
Augustinis. The first number of Woodstock Letters was issued on January 31,
1872. The publication continued unabated for nearly a century, ninety-eight
years and 320 issues to be exact, until it was formally closed in 1969.9 At the
time of its discontinuation Woodstock Letters was the oldest Jesuit magazine in
the United States, and one of the oldest continuously published magazines in the
whole Society.

Woodstock Letters was a success from its inception. Jesuit missionaries had
traditionally sent letters to their home province superiors detailing their
experiences in foreign lands. The earliest of these "Edifying Letters" came from
the missionaries to China and Japan and were subsequently published in Lisbon in
1598. In the course of time it became the practice among European scholasticates
of the Society to regularly publish some of this correspondence in annuals or
even quarterlies, rather than as books. Woodstock Letters was, and was intended
to be, an English language rival to the "Letters" of the Europeans. As a later
historian of Woodstock Letters wrote about Father de Augustinis:

He had a wide and virgin field, and worked it well. He had all North America to
draw from, and there was much of interest going on in the country that was
hidden from even the majority of Ours. Soon all America, North, Central and
South, was embraced as a source of information for us as well as for Europe, and
finally the whole world was ransacked for edifying news.10 Woodstock Letters
offered more than merely "edifying letters." As the number of Jesuit provinces
in America increased, provincial journals were organized to publish material
with an eye to gaining the financial support of the laity, and eventually the
magazine Jesuit Missions, established in 1928, assumed that burden for all
missions. But many details of the mission situation which were thought to be
unsuitable for publication in a mission magazine for lay people were reserved
for the Jesuit community readership of Woodstock Letters.


Jesuit missionaries were educated men, keen observers. They were graduates of
the finest universities in Europe, and recipients of some of the most rigorous
religious training in the world. They were also literate men in the finest sense
of the word. As missionaries they sought more than mere conversion of other
peoples. Cultural understanding was important, too. They were, as one author put
it, "trained in all the arts that make for intelligence, endlessly curious, and
forever alert in their quest after knowledge.

The editorship of Woodstock Letters changed over the years, but through at least
the Silver Jubilee volume (1896) the concentration of coverage remained on the
history and activities of the Society in America. Prophetically, the very first
article in the first issue of Woodstock Letters carried the remembrances of
Father Andrew White, the first English-speaking missionary to America, founder
of the Maryland missions, and chaplain to the first settlers in the only
Catholic English colony.

A sample of later titles reveals that articles of historical research into "the
inspiring past which is common heritage of all American Jesuits" was the main
concern of the Woodstock Letters.12 Articles on missions in the Dakotas, Idaho
Territory, New York and Canada or anywhere else Jesuits were ministering to
Native Americans were placed beside histories of colleges and parish churches.
There was an essay on the Natchez Indians in the 1730s, another on the Nez
Perces tribe in the 1880s, a series on the Jesuits in Cincinnati, and numerous
biographical accounts of early Jesuits.

Serial articles on historical topics were especially prevalent during the
editorship of Father Edward I. Devitt, S.J. (1879-1883). Devitt, for example,
personally edited a seven-part series on "Papers Relating to the Early History
of Maryland,"13 and followed with Father Nicholas Point's "Recollections of the
Rocky Mountains," translated from the French illustrated volumes in Montreal.14
Succeeding editors continued this historical tradition by including the ten
letters of Father M. Nash, S.J., chaplain to Billy Wilson's Zouaves during the
American Civil War,15 and the valuable reminiscences of the frontier missionary
Father Paul M. Ponziglione, S.J. during the 1880s.16 The first twenty volumes of
Woodstock Letters, in fact, contain more than eight hundred historical articles
of varying length. Woodstock Letters are, as one historian has pointed out, the
Iliad of the Society of Jesus.17

History long remained the forte of Woodstock Letters and the initial fifty
volumes (1872-1924) totaled nearly fifteen hundred history related articles on
the different tertianships, scholasticates, and colleges of the Society,
biographies, obituaries, translations of foreign manuscripts, and recollections
by American missionaries. Still, Woodstock Letters was not a static publication.
Beginning in 1889, Father Samuel H. Frisbee, S.J. assumed the editorship of the
Letters and little by little he began to divert the emphasis away from the
archives and into the contemporary work of the Society. To accomplish this
without sacrificing the record of the past, the size of the magazine was
gradually enlarged. As a result missionary articles increasingly centered on
Alaska, Iceland, or Goa, but there were other articles on prison conditions in
Baltimore, a summary statement on the Congregation of Procurators at Rome, and
so forth. By the time he retired in 1906 Father Frisbee had brought Woodstock
Letters into the twentieth century in more ways than one.

Besides the main articles, a key element in Woodstock Letters was the Varia.18
Here are presented many obscure documents, letters, and reminiscences about the
activities of the Society in colonial, revolutionary, early national, Civil War
and early twentieth century America. After 1886 the Varia began to include
letters from Jesuits abroad, and, still later, Woodstock Letters published
English translations of important documents that had first appeared in some of
the European Letters.19

Though Woodstock Letters were, originally, a reflection of the English and
French Jesuits' Letters, their success encouraged other European provinces to
publish their own record. The German province, the Italian province, and the
French Jesuits, who were in exile on the Isle of Jersey, are examples. In 1899
the Spanish members of the Society issued Carlos Edificantes de las Assistancia
de Espana, and upon the occasion the Father General of the Society took the
opportunity to remark on the importance of these publications. The Father
General related the difficulties attending the printing and distribution of each
province's annual letter and for the first time he gave formal endorsement and
encouragement to the "publication in the vernacular and the reading in our
refectories of letters from Ours at home and on the missions, such as has been
done for a number of years in several provinces." Though not specifically cited,
Woodstock Letters were credited with two innovations which were recommended to
other journals. First, that not merely the letters of one's own province should
be published, but also the principal subjects of the letters of other
assistancies. Secondly, the use of the Varia was officially sanctioned as a way
to record valuable narratives and other documents in the province history.

The American Jesuit community grew from 850 members in 1872 to about 6,100 at
the end of World War II, and the number of provinces increased to eight, but
Woodstock Letters was still the single publication through which all American
members of the Society could communicate with their brothers. After Volume 75,
(1946), however, Woodstock Letters was reorganized. A book review section was
added, as was a resume of the American Assistancy during the previous year.
Another new feature was The Missions, a compilation of communications from
missionaries around the world, edited by the staff of Jesuit Missions magazine.
The Varia, Historical Notes, and the Obituary, long recognized as three of the
mainstays of the Woodstock Letters were expanded and upgraded.20 The selection
of main articles that emphasized historical research, or extended descriptions
of important contemporary American Jesuit enterprises, was also retained though
increasingly the articles were "learned" in tone and reflective of some
ascetical or pastoral concept.

Each title page of Woodstock Letters clearly stated that it was "For Private
Circulation."21 Woodstock Letters were intended for, perhaps one could even say
restricted to, the private and exclusive use of members of the Society of
Jesus.22 They were not copyrighted because they were neither sold nor given away
beyond the circle of the Society. Acquisition of Woodstock Letters was by
subscription only and the list was limited to Jesuit colleges, secondary
schools, scholasticates in America, and selected provincialates in Europe.
Funding, as well as intention, limited the press runs, especially for the first
100 issues, to an estimated 200 copies or fewer.23 As a result, a century after
Woodstock Letters were begun, fewer than a dozen complete sets survived in
American university and research libraries.24

Many intellectual historians consider the founding of Woodstock Letters to be
one of the four superior achievements of late nineteenth century Catholic
literature. They place it alongside the revival of the Brownson's Quarterly
Review (New York 1873-75), the American Catholic Quarterly Review (Philadelphia
1876-1924), and Donahoe's Magazine (Boston 1879-1908).

There is no question but that Woodstock Letters are the direct descendants, the
legitimate heirs, of the two famous journals of the old Society, the French
Jesuit Relations of the seventeenth century, and the Neue Welt-Bott of the
eighteenth century German Jesuits. For fifty years after 1872 Woodstock Letters
was the only one of the many Jesuit publications devoted to reporting the
Society's work world-wide. After the 1920s Rome itself recommenced a new form of
the Epistolae Annales called the Memorabilia to assume that obligation, but for
half a century Woodstock Letters stood alone in that field. Interestingly,
Woodstock Letters, filled as they were with intimate, detailed reports on
frontier conditions, also served as an inspiration to Reuben Gold Thwaites in
his effort to resurrect and publish a new edition of the Jesuit Relations in
seventy-three volumes between 1896 and 1901.y A list of the editors of Woodstock
Letters follows on p. 9.

The first of five indexes for Woodstock Letters appeared in 1888, covering the
years 1872 to 1882. It is divided into three areas: historical papers,
biographies (sketches, notices, obituaries), and general articles. A follow-up
index was completed for volumes 11-15 along the same lines. In 1898 volumes
1-25, 1872-1896, were fully indexed, this time by separate lists of articles,
authors, and obituary notices.26 Volumes 36-53, 1897-1924, were indexed in 1924
in the same manner as the third index. The last, and most comprehensive
alphabetical index of persons, places, and things for Woodstock Letters, was
prepared in 1960 and covered volumes 1-80, 1872-1951. After 1951 the annual
volumes of Woodstock Letters each contained their own detailed index.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


